---
title: Annie Ernaux Turns Memory Into Art
subtitle: Many authors write about their lives. Over nearly fifty years, the Nobel laureate has discovered new ways to do it.
authorName: Alexandra Schwartz
coverImageURL: https://media.newyorker.com/photos/636de0111fe664ad11dc6d06/master/w_2240,c_limit/221121_r41367.jpg
coverImageDescription: For decades, the Nobel laureate has reworked the meaning of her own experiences.
hashTag: Life and Letters
publishDate: November 14, 2022
---

“Idon’t feel particularly like another woman,” Annie Ernaux said, on a recent afternoon, when she was asked what it was like to win the Nobel Prize in Literature. Does winning a prize—the prize—turn you into someone else? In the minds of others it does. Although Ernaux has never been preoccupied with her Nobel odds, she has long been considered a contender by those who delight in speculating about which of the world’s writers the Swedes will crown next. Last year, at Nobel time, Ernaux left her home in the Paris suburb of Cergy for a physical-therapy appointment and found herself barraged by journalists who had camped out in front of her gate, “just in case.” The day before this year’s announcement, people at Gallimard, her French publisher, warned her not to go out or answer the phone the next morning. She obliged, even when she saw a Swedish number popping up repeatedly on her caller I.D. (“A bad joke,” she assumed. She has been hoaxed in the past.) A few minutes after one in the afternoon, she turned on the transistor radio in her kitchen and heard her own name. “It was perfectly unreal,” Ernaux said. She was alone with her cats.

Six days later, I met Ernaux in the handsome Tribeca loft of Daniel Simon, the head of her American publisher, Seven Stories Press. At eighty-two, she is still tall (thanks to genetics) and blond (by choice). She had paired her sober black trousers and shoes with splashes of color: a scarf the green of Giverny in summertime, a fuchsia blouse. On the coffee table in front of her was an open Tupperware filled with brownies and macaroons, the remnants of a celebratory lunch that had just been held in her honor at the Press’s office, around the corner. Officially, Ernaux was in town to attend the New York Film Festival screening of “The Super 8 Years,” a movie that she made with her son David Ernaux-Briot, but the prize had turned the trip into an impromptu victory tour. At the Walter Reade Theatre, and at previously scheduled events at Barnard and the French bookstore Albertine, she was greeted by packed, jubilant houses. There were dinners to be attended, stacks of books to be signed.

Ernaux’s books tend to be short, often around a hundred pages, and ferociously sharp, written in a direct, declarative style that she has called “l’écriture plate”: “flat writing.” (“I shall never experience the pleasure of juggling with metaphors or indulging in stylistic play,” she once wrote, sounding as resolved as a Franciscan friar—and a little regretful, too.) A reader might expect a certain austerity in Ernaux’s manner, but she likes being around people, and it shows. Maybe because she spent years as a middle-school teacher, she is of the “There are no stupid questions” camp when it comes to audience Q. & A.s. Before we met, I had thought that Ernaux, who had not been to New York in more than two decades, might like to see something of the city, but I worried that all the ruckus might have tired her out. No, no, she said. “It’s when I’m alone that the fatigue hits.”

So much activity had left little time to process the Nobel. “It’s true that it’s very destabilizing,” Ernaux told me, in French. She has kept a diary since she was sixteen—the practice forms the bedrock of her writing life—but she still hadn’t recorded the news in it. Her most recent entry dated to the night before the announcement, when, in “a profound state of discontent,” she noted that if she won “they’ll steal my old age from me.” She would be too busy to write for at least a year. At forty, that might not have mattered—but at eighty-two? “I’m already old,” she told me. “That’s a problem. Well, not a problem. It’s a state, the one I happen to be in, and I don’t feel at all bad to be in it. I’m just observing what’s changed.”

I knew about stolen youth, I said, but the idea of stolen old age hadn’t occurred to me.

“Exactly,” Ernaux said. “What really interests me about youth is that it’s always the time that you remember later. But I won’t be able to remember my old age. So! I have to live it to the fullest.”

In the course of her nearly fifty-year career, Ernaux has published more than twenty books. The first few were what you and I would call autobiographical novels: the protagonists, young women to whom Ernaux lent her own thoughts and experiences, are clearly self-portraits. Pretty soon, though, Ernaux pulled down the scrim of fiction and adopted the first person. Her “I” is not a put-on, some coy invitation to the reader to try to untangle what is real from what is false. Ernaux works exclusively from the factual material of life—her life. But how to shape and present the facts? How to account for their particular power and the way that the truth changes, or doesn’t, when exposed to the forces of memory and time? These are profound artistic questions, fundamental to both Ernaux’s creative practice and her moral principles. “I believe that any experience, whatever its nature, has the inalienable right to be chronicled,” she has written. “There is no such thing as a lesser truth.”

That credo may explain why Ernaux has proved inexhaustible to herself as a subject. She doesn’t write her way through life in the manner of a Karl Ove Knausgaard, detailing every inch of experience, volume by volume, into the present. She is more like a diver, glimpsing something glimmering far beneath the surface of consciousness and plunging after it. To this impulse she likes to pair forensic methods. Photographs and newspaper records can be as important as her own journal entries as tools for reconstructing the past:

> Naturally I shall not opt for narrative, which would mean inventing reality instead of searching for it. Neither shall I content myself with merely picking out and transcribing the images I remember; I shall process them like documents, examining them from different angles to give them meaning. In other words, I shall carry out an ethnological study of myself.

The book in which these lines appear, “Shame,” was published in 1997. (The English translation is by Tanya Leslie.) Its opening is unforgettable: “My father tried to kill my mother one Sunday in June, in the early afternoon.” That was in the summer of 1952, when Ernaux was eleven. It took her nearly forty-five years to try to make sense of what this terrifying event meant to her, and, by the book’s end, she is still not sure that she has. “I have always wanted to write the sort of book that I find it impossible to talk about afterward, the sort of book that makes it impossible for me to withstand the gaze of others,” she writes. This paradoxical wish, to reveal the darkest parts of herself with such pitiless accuracy that she will be forced to fall silent once and for all, is an extraordinary expression of writerly ambition. In any case, it has still not come true.

The purpose of Ernaux’s writing, she believes, is not merely to record things that have happened but to “make things exist.” This is strong, but it is hardly the strongest thing she has to say about her work. “I am a medium,” she told me. “I feel that I’m someone who can transmit things.”

Much of what Ernaux transmits—what it is to grow up working class in a society that is contemptuous of workers; what it is to be a woman dispossessed of her body by the laws of the state, or by the overpowering prerogatives of desire—has made her a literary model, even a hero, to those who have shared similar experiences or points of view. Ernaux’s book “Happening,” in which she describes seeking an illegal abortion as a twenty-three-year-old student, is a feminist touchstone; it was adapted, last year, into a movie by the director Audrey Diwan. Writers like Didier Eribon, Édouard Louis, and Marie NDiaye are openly indebted to Ernaux in both substance and style. Ernaux has been asked if she is proud to have been adopted as a kind of literary godmother, or even as a spokesperson, but she feels that “pride” is the wrong word. “I never wanted to write for,” Ernaux told me. “I write from.” Still, she was moved by the joy with which readers greeted the Nobel announcement. She considered the prize “a collective” achievement.

The same things that make many people love Ernaux make many others despise her. Relentlessly personal in her art, she has, in public life, taken on the role of the écrivaine engagée, outspokenly committed to a host of left-wing political causes, and, while she was being appreciated in New York, accusations lobbed by her conservative detractors were flying fast in France. Ernaux was an anti-Semite (she supports the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions movement as a way of advancing the Palestinian cause), an Islamofascist (she considers French antipathy to the hijab to be a means of silencing women), a pedophile (her latest book, “Le Jeune Homme,” recounts an affair that Ernaux had in her fifties with a man some thirty years her junior), wokiste (she is a proponent of #MeToo and of the gilets jaunes). “Decidedly, this ‘academy’ of old shriveled bigwigs has gone a step further into the absurd and the indecent,” railed one editorial beneath the headline “the nobel in literature definitively discredited.” In the conservative newspaper Le Figaro, a writer disparaged the decision to award the “high priestess of autofiction” for a “lifetime spent writing about herself.”

“They think I’m not legitimate,” Ernaux said to me. “What disgusts them is that there are people who have found, in literature, something that speaks to them, and that those people aren’t C.E.O.s or company bosses.” Ernaux is also the first French woman to win the Nobel, “and that doesn’t work for them, at all.” For years, she has dealt with sexist criticism of her work, and not just from the right. After she published “Simple Passion,” a soul-baring account of a love affair with a married man, a literary critic at the liberal weekly Le Nouvel Observateur took to calling her Madame Ovary.

I suggested to Ernaux that there might be something validating in the present outpouring of loathing. Hadn’t she been writing for years about the contempt of the rich for the poor, of men for women, of the dominant for the downtrodden? “It’s proof,” she agreed. Still, it depressed her. In the uproar, Ernaux saw a renewal of the frightening wave of outrage that had engulfed her ten years ago, when she published a column in Le Monde decrying “A Literary Elegy for Anders Breivik,” a barely concealed apologia for the Norwegian mass murderer by Richard Millet, an author and editor at Gallimard. While condemning Breivik’s crimes, Millet blamed them on multiculturalism and the erosion of European Christian identity; Ernaux called his text “a fascist pamphlet that dishonors literature.” Three days later, Millet stepped down from Gallimard’s prestigious reading committee. Many others shared Ernaux’s disgust—for instance, J. M. G. Le Clézio, Nobelled in 2008. But Ernaux’s column, counter-signed by a hundred and eighteen fellow-writers, was seized upon as a flash point. L’affaire Richard Millet became a kind of referendum on what wasn’t yet termed cancel culture, with Ernaux denounced as a harridan intent on enforcing politically correct censorship at the expense of a man’s career. “I was called a killer,” Ernaux said. She herself felt that “it was really a hallali”—a hunting call, with Ernaux as the chased stag.

One of the phrases most associated with Ernaux, “transfuge de classe,” can seem derogatory. A “transfuge” is a defector. But Ernaux herself uses the term, partly as an objective description of her situation as a woman who, by dint of education, rose to the middle class and then, by force of talent, to the cultural élite—and partly, it can seem, as a kind of deserved epithet that expresses her own ambivalent feelings at having moved so far from the world of her parents. In 1983, when she published “A Man’s Place,” an account of her father’s life, she took as an epigraph a quotation by Jean Genet: “May I venture an explanation: writing is the ultimate recourse for those who have betrayed.”

Annie Duchesne was born in September, 1940, in Lillebonne, a town in Normandy where her parents ran a café-grocery. Since the nineteenth century, the area, which sits in a valley north of the Seine, had been dominated by cotton mills. “Even now, to mention the Valley in prewar times is to evoke images of horror: the highest concentration of alcoholics and unmarried mothers, the damp running down the walls, and the babies dying from diarrhea within two hours,” Ernaux writes in “A Woman’s Story” (1987), a companion to “A Man’s Place” about her mother. For her parents, though, life there was a step up. Both Alphonse Duchesne and Blanche Duménil left school at the age of twelve, Alphonse to labor as a farmhand, Blanche for a job in a margarine factory. They met while working at a rope factory in Yvetot, Blanche’s home town. Alphonse was tall, owned a bicycle, and went to the cinema. “He didn’t look common,” Blanche liked to say. Seven years younger, she was vivacious, proud, and temperamental, quick to laugh and quick to shout, a red-headed Catholic who loved to read novels and refused to miss Mass. They married in 1928, to the disdain of Alphonse’s sisters, who had worked as housemaids and looked down on factory girls. Blanche scorned them back, along with anyone else who made a living “licking the arses of the rich.”

Blanche proved to be the engine of the marriage, the dreamer and the doer. It was her idea to take over the café-grocery—she was a natural behind the counter—though this was not the end of hard times. The clientele was poor, and often asked for credit; Alphonse worked other jobs to keep the family afloat. Then there was the German Occupation to deal with, and the chaotic scramble of rationing and rebuilding that followed the war. When Annie was five, the family moved to Yvetot and took over another, more profitable café-grocery, living in the rooms upstairs. That is where Ernaux grew up: sleeping with her parents in a single bedroom, using an outdoor toilet, greeting customers with a loud, clear “Bonjour” while watching, at Blanche’s instruction, to see that they didn’t pinch anything from the shelves.

These are the foundational facts of Ernaux’s early life, and she gives them to us straight. It is in “A Man’s Place” that she introduces the idea of l’écriture plate, which is rendered in the book’s English edition as a “neutral way of writing,” though that’s not really right. Language is never neutral, Ernaux says. The purpose of her “flat” style is political, not just artistic. She doesn’t want to sentimentalize or aggrandize the lives of the working poor, to tilt toward the twin traps of pity and populism. She uses the kinds of richly “novelistic” detail that a modern-day Dickens might make much of, but the effect is clinical, not colorful, as if we were seeing slides placed under a microscope: the sachets of garlic that were sewn inside children’s shirts when her father was small to protect against worms; the way that her paternal grandmother, a woman of style, refused to piss standing up as other country people did; the way that her maternal grandmother, a woman of thrift, did the laundry with ash and used the stove’s fading heat to dry plums. “This knowledge—handed down from mother to daughter for many centuries—stops at my generation,” Ernaux writes. “I am only the archivist.” So she has taken the laundry ash and the dried plums and used them to produce a sociology of a lost world. (Bourdieu was a big influence.)

But there is also a psychological side to what Ernaux is doing. Both “A Man’s Place” and “A Woman’s Story” begin with a parent’s death, and not just the death; before we have even met these people, Ernaux shows us their corpses. Here is her father, who died unexpectedly at home at the age of sixty-seven—his open eyes, his bared gums, the spidery veins on his chest, even his penis, briefly exposed as his clothes are changed for burial—and here is her mother, wrapped in a sheet at the nursing home where she spent her last years, stricken with Alzheimer’s. There is something icy and estranging in this way of looking; the first words of “A Woman’s Story”—“My mother died on Monday 7 April”—echo Camus’s famous “Today, Maman died,” and a better model of detachment would be hard to find. But detachment doesn’t always equal indifference. Ernaux’s resolve here seems very like the performance of a child who has vowed to act adult, to be brave in the face of terror. “Flat” writing can seem easy, even artless. Actually, Ernaux says, it is excruciatingly hard, but introducing tenderness would corrupt her entire project: