---
title: The Unlikable Souls of “Glass Onion”
subtitle: Rian Johnson’s sequel to “Knives Out,” in which Daniel Craig returns as the sybaritic detective Benoit Blanc to solve a murder mystery, is extravagant but none too sturdy, and curiously cold to the touch.
authorName: Anthony Lane
coverImageURL: https://media.newyorker.com/photos/637533eef4bc8ee30e83858c/master/w_2240,c_limit/221128_r41427.jpg
coverImageDescription: Daniel Craig plays the dapper sleuth Benoit Blanc in Rian Johnson’s new film.
hashTag: The Current Cinema
publishDate: November 18, 2022
---

The big difference between “Knives Out” (2019) and its sequel, “Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery,” is one of climate change. In many respects, the two movies are twins. Both are directed by Rian Johnson; both star Daniel Craig as Benoit Blanc, the sybaritic sleuth; and both present Blanc with a puzzle to solve. The first film was centered on a Massachusetts mansion, amid the rustle of autumn leaves, whereas the new one largely unfolds on a Greek island, in charring heat. The downside is a lack of shadows—a bummer for anyone who believes that murder is most foul, and most gratifying, when draped in gloom. The upside is that we get to see Craig, who rose from the waves like a dripping god in “Casino Royale” (2006), step gingerly into a swimming pool wearing a two-piece bathing costume, in striped seersucker, that even the shyest Victorian gent would have deemed too modest by half. Oh, and a buttercup-yellow cravat, knotted and spotted. Nice.

Nattier still is the scene in which Blanc lounges in his bath, crowned with a tasselled smoking cap, sucking on a cigar, and bored out of his giant mind. “I need a great case,” he says. And here it comes. He is summoned to the island in the sun; other invitations, each cached within a cunning box, are sent to his fellow-guests. From the top: Duke (Dave Bautista), who has found fame, if you can call it that, on YouTube, and his inamorata, Whiskey (Madelyn Cline); Claire (Kathryn Hahn), the flustered governor of Connecticut; Birdie (Kate Hudson), once a model, now an entrepreneur, always a fool, plus her assistant, Peg (Jessica Henwick); a scientist named Lionel (Leslie Odom, Jr.); and, to general consternation, Cassandra Brand (Janelle Monáe). Their host is Miles Bron (Edward Norton), a reclusive billionaire who used to be Cassandra’s business partner before casting her adrift. Reputedly, Miles is a master of new technologies. Demonstrably, he is a dick.

The opening twist, in the pretzel of a plot, is that Miles lures these folk to his domain and dares them to unpick “the mystery of my murder.” One obvious model here is Agatha Christie’s “A Murder Is Announced,” published in 1950. In both instances, an apparently lighthearted game morphs into a crime with no heart at all; those familiar with the book, indeed, will have a head start in identifying the slayer in the film. Where Johnson scores over Christie is in the whiplash of his storytelling. We get flashbacks, switchbacks, a darting shoal of red herrings, and scenes whose meaning is upended when viewed from another angle, with fresh information at our command. As Whiskey pours herself all over Miles, say, does she know that Duke is watching through the window? Does he know if she knows?

The title swings two ways. First, toward a track on the White Album, in which fans who read too much into Beatles lyrics are waggishly ribbed by John Lennon. “The walrus was Paul,” he sings. Only by such obsessive detail-sniffing, of course, can you hope to decode a movie like this one. Second, there is an actual glass onion: a stately dome, sitting atop Miles’s island lair, and a telling symbol, I would say, for this extravagant but none too sturdy film. It is shiny with mischief, crafted with guile, and performed with eager wit—not least by Kate Hudson, who turns the tweeting Birdie into the empress of faux pas. (On “Oprah,” we learn, Birdie compared herself to Harriet Tubman; she also thinks that sweatshops are where sweatpants are made.) Why, then, should the whole enterprise feel so curiously thin and cold to the touch?

The clue lies in Agatha Christie. Her gang of suspects, in “A Murder Is Announced,” was a mixture of young and old—as it was in “Knives Out,” which was thoroughly warmed by the friendship, fond and non-creepy, between an elderly author (Christopher Plummer) and his nurse (Ana de Armas). No such good will exists in “Glass Onion,” which is stiff with unlikable souls, all of them Miles’s pals, and thus of the same generation. Frankly, who cares who assassinates whom? Also, in the novel, as Miss Marple observes, “nobody knows any more who anyone is.” In the messy wake of war, one could forge not only a new identity but a fictitious past. That covering of tracks isn’t so easy in the digital age, and you can sense Johnson bending the evidence to fit the tale. At one point, somebody is killed before he or she can share a fact that just popped up on Google Alerts. What a way to go.

As for the climax, I will reveal only that it involves major mayhem. In line with“Parasite” (2019) and this year’s “Triangle of Sadness,” “Glass Onion” is bent on smashing the wealthy, together with all their toys—which, coming from a star-stuffed Hollywood spectacle, on a plump budget, strikes me as a bit rich. I wonder what Daniel Craig makes of it all. He clearly relishes the languid brain work, and savors the character of Blanc as if it were ripe Brie, yet here he is, with everything exploding in fireballs. Isn’t that what he was running away from, when he fled the world of Bond?

Tall and black-gowned, with a paunch and a pair of blue-tinted spectacles, Jack Gladney (Adam Driver) is the chairman—and the proud founder—of the department of Hitler studies at the College-on-the-Hill, a pleasant cradle of learning. And here’s the fun part: Jack doesn’t speak German. He tries, but he just can’t get his all-engulfing American mouth around the Teutonic tongue. This frustrated figure, inclined to be hopeful yet pestered by intimations of doom, and brought to life by the tireless Driver, is the hero of “White Noise,” written and directed by Noah Baumbach.

The movie is based on Don DeLillo’s novel of the same name, from 1984, and is set in that decade. (Hands up: who is instinctively on the side of any film that is smartphone free?) As so often with Baumbach, we are ushered into the bosom of a family. This bosom is busier than most, because Jack and his wife, Babette (Greta Gerwig), not only have a child of their own but also house kids from their previous marriages; two of the siblings, Steffie and Heinrich, are played by a real-life sister and brother, May and Sam Nivola, thus adding to the lived-in domestic texture of the story. If, like me, you enjoy watching smoothly choreographed sequences of people weaving in and out of rooms, chattering and snacking, or rallying one another to the TV (“Hurry up, plane-crash footage!”), then the everyday crackle and hum of “White Noise” will be enough.

But this is DeLillo, so we must brace ourselves for narratives—or, at any rate, for occurrences that are so dense with the gaseous air of conspiracy that you can barely breathe. Hence the pills that Babette takes, in secret, or the “Airborne Toxic Event” that shrouds the landscape and causes the townsfolk, including the Gladneys, to evacuate. Baumbach, too, is taking flight, away from his regular zones of operation and into Spielberg country, where the highways seize up in mass panic, beneath a storm cloud as loomingly vast as a spaceship. And, all the while, everyone converses in fluent DeLillo: “Maybe there’s no death as we know it, just documents changing hands.” What husband has ever said that to his wife? On the page, the fact that the characters sound like the author somehow deepens the ominous charm of the spell that he casts. Onscreen, it’s too weird for words.

Nevertheless, even if you grow impatient with “White Noise”—an intimate black comedy that dreams of becoming an epic—stick with it, for the sake of the end credits. Unfolding in wide shot, against the background of a seething supermarket, like an Andreas Gursky photograph, these are a miniature masterpiece unto themselves. Given the chance, Baumbach can’t help making a song and dance of things. Someone please put him in charge of a musical, and soon.

There is more than one son in “The Son.” The first son we see, at the start of Florian Zeller’s new film, is a baby named Theo. He is doted upon by his mother, Beth (Vanessa Kirby), and his father, Peter (Hugh Jackman), who live comfortably in New York. Discomfort arrives at the door, in the shape of the anxiety-shredded Kate (Laura Dern). She is Peter’s ex-wife, and she brings news of their son, Nicholas (Zen McGrath), who is seventeen. “He scares me, O.K.?” Kate says.

Nicholas is hardly the spawn of Satan. He seems a mild and dreamy boy; his gaze is misted over, as if his mind were drifting elsewhere, and it’s no surprise to learn that he has been skipping school. What did he do all day? “I walked.” And what’s his problem? “It’s life. It’s weighing me down.” The simplicity of these replies exasperates his father, a lawyer with political ambitions. (Not that the film is remotely interested in work; it’s merely an arena for private pain.) Peter’s response to the revelation that Nicholas has been self-harming is typical. “I forbid you to do this,” he says. That should do the trick.

Nicholas, who has hitherto lived with Kate, moves in with Peter and Beth, and appears—though only appears—to be on the mend. He is loved by those around him, and yet, as a doctor says, “Love will not be enough.” Advice that chills the heart. Many viewers, with experience of mental-health crises in their own homes, may decide that the plot of this movie cuts all too close to the bone. (Few of them will be wealthy professional New Yorkers with ready access to psychiatric care.) If “The Son” lacks the grip of Zeller’s previous film, “The Father” (2020), it’s because the fable of Nicholas and Peter has the brittle feel of a setup. Over and over, as situations are constructed, you can spot the payoff coming; when Peter dances with Beth, in their apartment, do we get a shot of Nicholas looking on, shut out from others’ pleasure? Check. Likewise, the finale relies on a detail that’s been planted, with maximum implausibility, a while before. The shock is blunted on impact.

This is not to scorn the skill of the actors, and Dern is on especially wrenching form. It is neither fair nor wise, however, to land Jackman with a role of ceaseless anguish, which, dancing aside, siphons off his natural geniality. The irony is that “The Son” is unceremoniously stolen by Anthony Hopkins, who won an Oscar as a man felled by dementia in “The Father.” He now plays Peter’s father, a power-monger with his wits intact and blazing, who, in a single scene, proceeds to torch the fragile emotional sympathies on which the whole film depends. His recommended cure for the suffering of his son and his grandson is as follows: “Just fucking get over it.” Is that not a monstrous thing to say? It is. Does the monster stay in your head, as the rest of the movie recedes? Completely.